[HUDI-5886][DOCS] Improve File Sizing, Timeline, and Flink docs (#8093)
apache/hudi: website/docs/timeline.md

toc: true
---

> A Hudi table maintains all operations happened to the table in a single timeline comprised of two parts, an active timeline and an archived timeline. The active timeline stores all the recent instant, while the archive timeline stores the older instants. An instant is a transaction where all respective partitions within a base path have been successfully updated by either a writer or a table service. Instants that get older in the active timeline are moved to archived timeline at various times.

Reviewer: `all the recent instant` -> `all the recent instants`

Reviewer: `the archive timeline stores` -> `the archived timeline stores`

Author: good catch- thanks!

The active timeline is under the `.hoodie` metadata folder. For example, when you navigate to your Hudi project directory:

```sh
cd $YOUR_HUDI_PROJECT_DIRECTORY && ls -a 
```

You’ll see the `.hoodie` metadata folder:

```sh
ls -a
.		..		.hoodie		americas	asia
```

When you navigate inside the `.hoodie` folder, you’ll see a lot of files with different suffixes and the archived timeline folder: 

```sh
cd .hoodie && ls
2023021018095339.commit
20230210180953939.commit.requested	
20230210180953939.inflight
archived
```

Before we go into what’s in the files or how the files are named, we’ll need to cover some broader concepts: 
- actions

> -  states

Reviewer: `-  states` -> `- states`

- instants

## Actions
An action describes what and how transactions were changed. Hudi guarantees that the actions performed on the timeline are atomic & consistent based on the instant time.
Key actions performed include:
- **COMMIT**: A commit denotes an atomic write of a batch of records into parquet base files in a table.
  -  Deltastreamer and Spark DataSource automatically support this; you do not need to set any configs. 

> - **REPLACECOMMIT**: This denotes an action that adds new data files to replace existing files in a table.

Reviewer 2: @danny0405 replacecommit is here, but we should mention clustering.  @nfarah86

- **ROLLBACK**: This indicates that a commit/delta commit was unsuccessful & rolled back, removing any partial files produced during the writes.
  - Hudi automatically supports rollbacks as the default behavior. 
  - However, the user can disable this setting and perform rollbacks separately. You can configure the [rollbacks](https://hudi.apache.org/docs/configurations#hoodierollbackparallelism) through the Spark SQL call procedure, Scala within a Spark Shell and the Hudi CLI tool. 
- **SAVEPOINT**: This marks certain file groups as "saved," where the cleaner will not delete them. It helps restore the table to a point on the timeline for disaster/data recovery scenarios.
  - This is supported by the Spark SQL call procedure, Scala within a Spark Shell and the Hudi CLI tool. You manually set up this action. 
- **RESTORE**: This indicates an action to restore the table to a previous state.
  - This is supported by the Spark SQL call procedure, Scala within a Spark Shell and the Hudi CLI tool. You manually set up this action. 

> - **INDEXING**: This denotes an action to [asynchronounsly build the index](https://hudi.apache.org/docs/metadata_indexing) in the metadata table.

Reviewer: Missed the CLUSTERING and REPLACE COMMIT actions.

Author: - **REPLACECOMMIT**: This denotes an action that adds new data files to replace existing files in a table.
  - Clustering generates `replacecommit`, for example, when you do clustering, it generates a `replacecommit` action.
  - Clustering is disabled by default. Please check the [clustering documentation](https://hudi.apache.org/docs/clustering/) for more details.

## States
A state denotes if an action has been scheduled, in progress or completed. There are three different states an action can be in: 
- **REQUESTED**: Denotes an action has been scheduled, but has not initiated.

> - **INFLIGHT**: Denotes an action is currently being performed.

Reviewer: `has been scheduled, but has not initiated.` -> ` has initiated, but has not been scheduled.`

Author: fixed- thanks!

## Instant
At its core, Hudi maintains a timeline of all actions performed on the table at different timestamps, represented as a series of instants. The instants provide snapshot views of the table, while also efficiently supporting data retrieval in the order of arrival. A Hudi instant consists of the following components:
- **instant time**: An instant time is typically a timestamp (e.g: 20190117010349 for second-level granularity prior to 0.10.0 release or 20190117010349567 for millisecond-level granularity since 0.10.0 release). The instant time monotonically increases in the order of action's begin time. The timezone will be the same as your machine's timeszone.
- **instant action**:  An instant action is a type of action performed on the table. 

> - **State suffix**: A state suffix is the current state of the instant.

Reviewer 2: make sure the style is consistent, either capitalized or not for all.

Inside the `.hoodie` folder, each transaction has three metadata files. Each file is named differently depending on the state: 
- For a transaction with a **requested** or **inflight** state, the files are written like this: 
  - [instantTime.instantAction.stateSuffix]
 - For a transaction with a **completed** state, the files are written like this: 
   - [instantTime.ActionName]

> Below are four instances inside the `.hoodie` folder. I want to highlight two instant examples where the states are different:

Reviewer 3: "I want to highlight" - > "Lets checkout"

Author: updated- thanks!

```sh
cd .hoodie && ls 
20230210181040140.commit.requested     #requested state
2023021018095339.commit                #completed state
20230210180953939.commit.requested  
20230210180953939.inflight

```

> - Looking at the second line where there is a **#requested** comment, we can see this instant file has the timestamp + action + state because it was in a requested state.

Reviewer: These line numbers seems wrong?

Author: updated to refer to the exact instance:

- Looking at `20230210181040140.commit.requested `, we can see this instant file has the timestamp + action + state because it was in a requested state.

- Looking at `2023021018095339.commit`, we can see this instant has the timestamp + action because it is in the completed state.

Author: wdyt @danny0405 ?

      "totalRollbackBlocks" : 0,
      "fileSizeInBytes" : 3404928,
      "minEventTime" : null,
      "maxEventTime" : null,
      "runtimeStats" : {
        "totalScanTime" : 0,
        "totalUpsertTime" : 1095,
        "totalCreateTime" : 0
      }
    } ]
  },
  "compacted" : false,
  "extraMetadata" : {
    "schema" : "{\"type\":\"record\",\"name\":\"hudi_trips_cow_record\",\"namespace\":\"hoodie.hudi_trips_cow\",\"fields\":[{\"name\":\"begin_lat\",\"type\":[\"null\",\"double\"],\"default\":null},{\"name\":\"begin_lon\",\"type\":[\"null\",\"double\"],\"default\":null},{\"name\":\"driver\",\"type\":[\"null\",\"string\"],\"default\":null},{\"name\":\"end_lat\",\"type\":[\"null\",\"double\"],\"default\":null},{\"name\":\"end_lon\",\"type\":[\"null\",\"double\"],\"default\":null},{\"name\":\"fare\",\"type\":[\"null\",\"double\"],\"default\":null},{\"name\":\"partitionpath\",\"type\":[\"null\",\"string\"],\"default\":null},{\"name\":\"rider\",\"type\":[\"null\",\"string\"],\"default\":null},{\"name\":\"ts\",\"type\":[\"null\",\"long\"],\"default\":null},{\"name\":\"uuid\",\"type\":[\"null\",\"string\"],\"default\":null}]}"
  },
  "operationType" : "UPSERT"
}%

> ```

Reviewer 2: Given the code blocks, are the screenshots still needed?

## Archived Timeline 
The archived timeline directory is used to store successful and older instants that we don’t touch on the regular basis. You can almost think of it as a cold timeline storage for older instants. The older instants from the active timeline are batched and merged together into a log file and then sent to the archive timeline directory. This helps keep the active timeline with fresher data so we can easily access it with low latency. 

The active timeline can be configured to contain a designated amount of files before they are transitioned to the archived timeline (see the configs below):

> 

Reviewer: Nice explanation here!

Author: thanks!

toc: true
---

> A Hudi table maintains all operations happened to the table in a single timeline comprised of two parts, an active timeline and an archived timeline. The active timeline stores all the recent instants, while the archived timeline stores the older instants. An instant is a transaction where all respective partitions within a base path have been successfully updated by either a writer or a table service. Instants that get older in the active timeline are moved to archived timeline at various times.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A Hudi table records all operations performed on a table in a single timeline comprised of two parts, an active timeline and an archived timeline. The active timeline stores all the recent instants, while the archived timeline stores the older instants. An instant is a transaction where all respective partitions within a base path have been successfully updated by either a writer or a table service. Instants that get older in the active timeline are moved to archived timeline at various times.
```

Reviewer 4: instant is not a transaction, just an id for a transaction. This file needs a deeper review still

Reviewer 4: this is more or less the first concepts page. so feels early to discuss partitions and table services here.

Author: > Snuck in a few more comments. Happy to suggest edits to the top parts in the timeline doc

Please suggest changes.

At its core, Hudi maintains a `timeline` of all actions performed on the table at different `instants` of time that helps provide instantaneous views of the table,
while also efficiently supporting retrieval of data in the order of arrival. A Hudi instant consists of the following components
A Hudi table maintains all operations happened to the table in a single timeline comprised of two parts, an active timeline and an archived timeline. The active timeline stores all the recent instants, while the archived timeline stores the older instants. An instant is a transaction where all respective partitions within a base path have been successfully updated by either a writer or a table service. Instants that get older in the active timeline are moved to archived timeline at various times.

> * `Instant action` : Type of action performed on the table

Reviewer 4: these are very foundational concepts to explain the core design. Not sure omitting them is a good idea

Author: not sure if I follow- it's on the doc. Just further down. 

<img width="849" alt="Screenshot 2023-03-23 at 10 22 42 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5392555/227431653-6fb601ed-8d72-4604-8c0a-0f04f529a90e.png">

> -   If you have one batch ingestion, you’ll see that as one commit in the active timeline. If you ingest streaming data, you might see multiple commits in the active timeline.When you open that commit file, you’ll see a JSON object with metadata about how one or more partitions were altered.

Reviewer 4: I don't follow this line. regardless of batch or streaming engines, 1 write is 1 commit. no?

Reviewer 4: >you’ll see a JSON object with metadata about how one or more partitions were altered

we track file level changes actually. and it's AVRO,right

We’ll go over some details and concepts about the active and archived timeline below. All files in the timelines are immutable.

:::caution
The user should never directly alter the timeline (i.e. manually delete the commits).
:::

## Active Timeline

> The active timeline is a source of truth for all write operations: when an action (described below) happens on a table, the timeline is responsible for recording it. This guarantees a good table state, and Hudi can provide read/write isolation based on the timeline. For example, when data is being written to a Hudi table (i.e., requested, inflight), any data being written as part of the transaction is not visible to a query engine until the write transaction is completed. The query engine can still read older data, but the data inflight won’t be exposed.

Reviewer 4: we should explain how timeline is a log, and atomicity is achieve by simply relying on atomic puts to storage.

      "totalLogRecords" : 0,
      "totalLogFilesCompacted" : 0,
      "totalLogSizeCompacted" : 0,
      "totalUpdatedRecordsCompacted" : 0,
      "totalLogBlocks" : 0,
      "totalCorruptLogBlock" : 0,
      "totalRollbackBlocks" : 0,
      "fileSizeInBytes" : 0,
      "minEventTime" : null,
      "maxEventTime" : null,
      "runtimeStats" : null
    }, {
      "fileId" : "85eb99c7-9e85-4b3c-835a-6dcc85e26839-0",
      "path" : null,
      "prevCommit" : "20230210181058805",
      "numWrites" : 0,
      "numDeletes" : 0,
      "numUpdateWrites" : 13029,
      "numInserts" : 0,
      "totalWriteBytes" : 0,
      "totalWriteErrors" : 0,
      "tempPath" : null,
      "partitionPath" : null,
      "totalLogRecords" : 0,
      "totalLogFilesCompacted" : 0,
      "totalLogSizeCompacted" : 0,
      "totalUpdatedRecordsCompacted" : 0,
      "totalLogBlocks" : 0,
      "totalCorruptLogBlock" : 0,
      "totalRollbackBlocks" : 0,
      "fileSizeInBytes" : 0,
      "minEventTime" : null,
      "maxEventTime" : null,
      "runtimeStats" : null
    } ]
  },
  "compacted" : false,
  "extraMetadata" : { },
  "operationType" : "UPSERT"
}%
```

#### A COMMIT in an completed state

> When a COMMIT is in a completed state, it’ll be have all the metadata information, including the schema: 

Reviewer 4: do we need this level of detail in the docs? We can just point to the schemas for this metadata? This is covered in the tech-specs already.
